Create 26-01-22_writeup.md (#135)
very-good-science/data-ethics-club: site/contents/write_ups/2022/26-01-22_writeup.md

The summary was written by Huw Day, who tried to synthesise everyone's contributions to this document and the discussion. "We" = "someone at Data Ethics Club". 
Nina Di Cara and Natalie Thurlby helped with a final edit.
```

## Introduction

The article investigates the question "Can energy usage data tell us anything about the quality of our programming languages?", commenting on the research paper [Energy Efficiency Across Programming Languages](https://greenlab.di.uminho.pt/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/sleFinal.pdf). In this paper, the researchers ran the solutions to 10 programming problems written in 27 different programming languages, while carefully monitoring how much electricity each one used — as well as its speed and memory usage. We discussed the methodology of the paper, the results and how it affected our view on coding in a more green way.

## Are you surprised by any of the results?

One of our members, Ben, pointed out some technical problems with the methodology of the paper, specfically, that the cache effects excluded.

> The cache keeps frequently used data nearby for quick access. This reduces the number of times you have to access your main memory. This has a large effect on energy consumption. This is one of the things that would have the most important impact on the output. The problems which the authors chose to analyse were comparatively small.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cache keeps frequently used data nearby for quick access. 
This reduces the number of times you have to access your main memory and has a large effect on energy consumption. 
This is one of the things that would have the most important impact on the output, but wasn't considered in the paper. 
As well as that, the problems which the authors chose to analyse were comparatively small in scale and complexity so would not be comparable to bigger, computationally intensive problems.
```

> In summary, the problem is measured wrong, based on flawed assumptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, the problem is based on flawed assumptions, and could have been measured more holistically.
```

The paper asks a question that is almost too specific. Another interesting question might be, which languages do people make the most mistakes in? This would mean having to consider recompiling the same problem over and over.

Some of us were suprised about the detail in the discussion, but not the results, generally that high level languages tend to use more energy. There is a lot of things missing on general sustainability.

> Others were not really sure what we expected, but our main expectations were C will be quite efficient and Python will not be. Python is more familiar to a lot of us so we do not want to go back to C. We will go back to C once billionaires stop launching themselves into space. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Others were not really sure what we expected, but our main expectations were C will be quite efficient and Python will not be. 
Python is easier and more familiar to a lot of us so we do not want to go back to having to use C. 
In reality, will the difference made by forcing everyone to write in C be worthwhile until billionaires stop launching themselves into space?
```

"The Research Software Engineering (RSE) Group worked with Dr Gary Barker, a Senior Lecturer in the School of Biological Sciences, to speed up a Perl script that he developed to find the minimal set of genetic markers needed to differentiate all samples in a genotyping dataset. After 10 days of work, the software was accelerated by over 25,000 times (figure 1). This reduced the runtime for identifying the minimal set of markers to distinguish different varieties of wheat from about 10 days to just 34 seconds!"

## Is changing our programming practices an effective way to reduce our environmental footprint?

Regardless of any technical issues of the study, many of us came to the conclusion that nothing from this paper at all should affect how we go about coding. 

Should we be thinking more carefully about which programming problems we even attempt to tackle and perhaps focussing on important and useful problem instead of training more and more useless models? Should energy metrics be reported alongside accuracy metrics? If all computational number theorists stopped computing or even if they just switched from Python to C, would that be better?

> There is great value to fundamental research even if it is not immediately apparent and so we should be cautious at cutting corners in research.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is great value to fundamental research even if it is not immediately apparent and so we should be cautious about cutting corners in research.
```

How much has this problem been thought of before?
Coding and coding infastructure is probaly not top of the list when we think of climate change. This paper does highlight that computational resources is fairly worth thinking about. Urgent to tackle but easiest solution (switch to renewable energy). Fewer steps to solving this. But we should also be mindful about resources used to make computers, as we discussed in a [previous talk](https://dataethicsclub.com/contents/write_ups/2021/11-08-21_writeup.html).

Speed is a good proxy for energy consumption. But if we make things faster then people might just run them more ofter. For example, creating more energy efficient fuel sources created more fuel consumption. This is an example of [Jevons' paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jevons_paradox#:~:text=In%20economics%2C%20the%20Jevons%20paradox,rises%20due%20to%20increasing%20demand.).

## What change would you like to see on the basis of this piece? Who has the power to make that change?

> What is the point of us being more effecient with coding when we're flying internationally for our jobs? Every little helps but it is difficult to make a significant impact on a larger scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is the point of us being more efficient with coding when we're flying internationally for our jobs? 
Every little helps but is it too difficult to make a significant impact on a larger scale?
Overall we were divided about this, with some of the group believing individual action cannot supersede industrial energy wastage, and others believing that it is worth doing what we can millions of individuals to make an impact. 
```
